PMTiles guide (#40)
developmentseed/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide: pmtiles/intro.qmd

---
title: PMTiles
subtitle: Guidelines for PMTiles
---

# PMTiles

PMTiles is a single-file archive format for tiled data, usually used for visualization.

PMTiles can be used for any format of tiled data. It's used most often with vector data, where each tile is encoded as a Mapbox Vector Tile (MVT), but can also be used with e.g. raster data or terrain mesh data.

> ## Analytical vs tiled data formats

Reviewer: I think we should put this in a general concepts page, but it's ok here for now

To understand PMTiles, it's important to understand the difference between "analytical" data and "tiled" data. Analytical data refers to data in its original form, without any modifications to geometry. Tiled data formats apply a variety of modifications to geometries, including clipping and simplification, to save space and make it faster to visualize.

![](../images/analytical_vs_tiled_geoms.png)

> Consider the above diagram. In an analytical format, every coordinate of the complex polygon would be included in the file. In a tiled format, the geometry would be split up into every tile it intersects, and possibly simplified as well.

Reviewer: It's not clear what this means: "the geometry would be split up into every tile it intersects". If I was to guess you are saying "in a tiled format, there are predefined tile sets (or grids) and each tile set will have 1 or more tiles (cells of the grid) and the geometry would be split into tiles which it intersects"

I think it's the phrase "every tile" which is confusing me, makes it sounds like the whole geometry is in every tile it intersects

> The analytical format is more useful for operations like a spatial join, because the entire geometry is available. It's harder to perform such analyses on tiled data because a program must:

Reviewer: I find this a little bit confusing. If you have an analytical format that is chunked, you may only read a subset of the data as well and then you don't have the entire geometry available. But maybe I'm misunderstanding this example. Would it be correct to summarize your point that tiled data is not intended for analytical use cases because you would have to reverse engineer the geometry?

Author: > If you have an analytical format that is chunked, you may only read a subset of the data as well and then you don't have the entire geometry available

The difference is that in an analytical format, you have a subset of the entire number of _rows_, but for every row, you know that you have the _whole_ geometry, not just a small part of it.

Thus analytical and visualization formats strive for different goals.

## Cloud-native

PMTiles is designed to be a cloud-native file format: used directly from a client over a network via HTTP range requests, without having a server in the middle.

## Internal format

PMTiles has a file header, one or more metadata regions, and a region of tile data.

The header is fixed length, located at the beginning of the file, and includes necessary information to decode the rest of the file accurately.

PMTiles includes _directories_, or regions of bytes with metadata about tiles. It's important for each directory to remain small, so while there will always be at least one directory, larger PMTiles archives with many tiles may include more than one directory.

At the end of the file is the tile data. This includes all data for all the tiles in the archive.

The full specification is defined [here](https://github.com/protomaps/PMTiles/blob/main/spec/v3/spec.md).

### Hilbert-oriented tiles

> Interally, tiles are oriented along a Hilbert Curve. This means that tiles that are spatially near each other are also located near each other in the file structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interally, tiles are oriented along a [Hilbert Curve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert_curve). This means that tiles that are spatially near each other are also located near each other in the file structure.
```

### From existing tiles or MBTiles

PMTiles has a [command-line program](https://github.com/protomaps/go-pmtiles) for creating PMTiles if you already have an MBTiles file or a directory of tiles.

## Using PMTiles

### PMTiles viewer

If you have an existing PMTiles archive, either as a local file or hosted on cloud storage, you can use the [PMTiles Viewer](https://protomaps.github.io/PMTiles/) to inspect the tiles hosted within the file.

### JavaScript

PMTiles doesn't have a standalone JavaScript library, but rather is designed to be used in conjunction with a JavaScript map rendering library.

See the docs on viewing PMTiles in [Leaflet](https://protomaps.com/docs/frontends/leaflet), [MapLibre GL JS](https://protomaps.com/docs/frontends/maplibre) and [OpenLayers](https://protomaps.com/docs/frontends/openlayers).

### Python

PMTiles has a [Python package](https://github.com/protomaps/PMTiles/tree/main/python), which allows reading and writing PMTiles archives from Python.

## Alternatives

> ### PMTiles

Reviewer: Should this say MBTiles?

Author: ```suggestion
### MBTiles
```

> The most common alternative for PMTiles is [MBTiles](https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec), which was in many ways the precursor to PMTiles. MBTiles stores the included vector tiles in a table in a SQLite database. This has the benefit of being much easier to use than manually managing millions of tiny, individual files, but has the downside of not being serverless. In general, it's impossible to read from a SQLite database without fetching the entire file's content. This meant that frontend clients like a web browser couldn't fetch tiles directly using range requests, but rather a server has to be running to fetch tiles from the MBTiles file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common alternative for PMTiles is [MBTiles](https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec), which was in many ways the precursor to PMTiles. MBTiles stores the included vector tiles in a table in a SQLite database. MBTiles has the benefit of being much easier to use than manually managing millions of tiny, individual files, but MBTiles is not serverless. In general, it's impossible to read from a SQLite database without fetching the entire file's content. This means that frontend clients like a web browser couldn't fetch tiles directly using range requests, but rather a server has to be running to fetch tiles from the MBTiles file.
```

> ### Saving individual files to cloud storage

Reviewer: This is a little confusing because it's not really clear earlier in the document that pmtiles is an archive but in theory you can work with the "bare tiled data" itself. Could we add something earlier in the document about how the archive is comprised of many individual tiles and what format those files are in? I'm actually not sure myself.

Author: I tried to make this a bit clearer in https://github.com/developmentseed/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide/pull/40/commits/ebc58dcb813b312338f913809198f615bc410f4b by likening a PMTiles to a zip file

It's also possible to upload the bare tiled data directly to cloud storage as individual files.

> This has significant downsides of needing to manage many millions of tiny individual files. This is also much slower to manage, as uploading millions of files to a cloud storage provider such as S3 can take hours. And on S3 it costs $5 per million files added to an S3 bucket. So if a PMTiles archive included 10 million files, it would cost $50 just to upload those files, compared to 5-millionths of a cent to upload the PMTiles file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This has significant downsides of needing to manage many millions of tiny individual files. Uploading millions of files to a cloud storage provider such as S3 takes time and money. For example, AWS charges $5 per million files added to an S3 bucket. So a 10 million PMTiles archive would cost $50, compared to 5-millionths of a cent to upload the PMTiles file.
```
